once around GK Persei.
So GK Persi is located in the region of
Perseus, the constellation somewhere
between the main body and the star Alol
that draws all the attention in that
area.
And this was first noted in 1901
as Nova Persi.
Scottish
medic and amateur astronomer Thomas
Anderson living in Edinburgh was out
observing on the night of the 22nd of
February 1901
looking at the constellation of Perseus
and he saw a new new to him star of
third magnitude. he described it as
and it hadn't been there before and he
was convinced that he hadn't missed it.
So he realized that something strange
was going on and watching it over a very
short period of time in a few days it
had brightened all the way from third
magnitude up to zero magnitude 0.2 in
fact was estimated.
Now, a photograph taken just two days
before
his first observation of this area
revealed that there was no bright star
in that location at all. But there was a
very faint one. I think it was 13th
magnitude. So just on the limit of
detectability for those days. And it
also showed that it had brightened in
just two days by 14 magnitudes on the
magnitude scale from uh magnitude + 13
all the way up to zero in just a couple
of days. That's quite amazing.
We have the light curve of it drawn from
1901 following its brightness down over
the next couple of years. So you can see
how the brightness peaked all the way up
at zero and then came down quite rapidly
um and eventually after a few years it
was back down to magnitude 12 again.
These drawings animated here at the
bottom are by GW Richie of the Yurkeis
Observatory who got involved in studying
what was going on with GK Persi. And you
can see that just in a couple of images
there, there is a nebula of gas lit up
by the flash of light from this sudden
brightening and fading. And that the
nebula looks very different between the
two pictures.
In fact, with the estimated distance
away of this object and its apparent
size, you could work out that it seemed
originally that the material was moving
away from the central explosion faster
than the speed of light, such as the
rate of expansion. But that is not so.
What we have here is a light echo. So,
it's not the gas that is moving. It's a
flash of light like a very bright camera
flash going off in the center. And that
light travels directly towards us and we
see the brightening of the central spot.
But the light can also travel sideways
and then bounce off other layers of
surrounding gas. And as it does so, each
progressive
layer in distance from the star is lit
up. And then the light, some of it
reflects in our direction. But because
that's a longer route for the light to
take, the visibility of that ring of gas
is delayed according to the extra
distance that the light has to travel.
This is a light echo. And so the light
echoes out through the nebula, lighting
up progressive rings. And you can see
that this is actually very complicated
indeed. Firstly, the shape is a 3D shape
and the the path length that the light
has to take um through the 3D shape
makes for it being very complicated.
Plus, there were some other features of
the explosion in that there were
subsequent brightenings going on as
well. But if we look at a modern picture
and this was astro picture of the day
recently of the nebula and region
surrounding GK Persi. It's called the
Fireworks Nebula and it's absolutely
stunning and you can see the huge
extent. You've got the object right in
the center there, the fairly bright
dropletike region around it, and then
moving out, further rings of of fainter
gas glowing with that characteristic red
color from hydrogen and then the grayer
whiter material even further out still.
Now, it's first detected that there was
this nebula in 1902, which is when those
earlier drawings were made. But
nowadays, we can study this in great
detail and measure that the cloud of gas
and dust is still expanding, moving away
from the center with a velocity up to
about 1,200 kilometers per second. Um,
and we know the distance to this object
quite precisely now at 1500 light years.
Um that's uh a reasonable way but still
gives us this fantastic view. I really
love this picture.
Now after 2 weeks beyond the initial
detection the magnitude had dropped down
to about magnitude 4 and then it
continued downwards for a while but went
into a period of 4 day long oscillations
uh gradually as it declined and you can
see that in the light curve drawing that
we have here with it periodically
brightening and fading every few days.
In 1920, it continued to misbehave and
was placed on a watch list as part of
the observing program to make regular
measurements to keep a very close eye on
what was going on here. So peculiar was
the behavior. And then finally in 1966,
another major outburst occurred. And you
can see this lovely animation here
showing uh a ring of gas exploding
outwards in a time-lapse uh series of
photographs from 1953 to 2012.
After that 1966 major outburst, it's
been repeatedly brightening about every
3 years or so. So, it's worth keeping an
eye on just in case it has another major
fit. So, what's going on? Well, GK Persi
is a binary star system. There are a
pair of stars orbiting each other in
just 2 days. That's a very close orbit.
There's a white dwarf star with a mass
just greater than that of the sun, 1.03
solar masses. And this is stealing
material away from its companion. It's
one of the most massive white dwarfs
that has been caught in the act of this
stellar piracy.
And the companion that's quite modest
actually, only 0.39, so 40% or so of the
mass of the sun. And it's what's
described as a subgiant. I've hear other
people talk about it being a red dwarf,
but it's not. It's a highly evolved star
that had become a red giant and has lost
a good fraction of its mass now over
onto its companion, reducing its mass
down to this much more um
tiny figure.
So, still glowing away, still red in
color um and fairly cool on the outside
compared to the very high temperature of
the white dwarf.
And the material, mostly hydrogen,
that's being stolen away from the outer
layers of the companion,
has been swirling inwards. It crosses
through what's called the Lrangee point,
the point of balance, of gravity between
the two, and the white dwarf grabs hold
of it and pulls it inwards. But it still
has a lot of angular momentum, a lot of
spin from the rotation of the stars and
their orbits that it has to get rid of.
And so it ends up in a death spiral in
an accretion disc spiraling inwards
radiating away heat and energy and
gradually falling towards the collision
with the white dwarf in the center. And
it's those u accretion discs that
provide a lot of the interest in
studying objects like this.
So this is a cataclysmic variable.
What's happening is that the hydrogen
transferred from the companion to the
white dwarf gradually builds up in a
layer on the surface of the white dwarf
and when it reaches a critical point and
there is enough material there the
temperature is such that a burst of
nuclear fusion thermonuclear
hydrogen to helium fusion that normally
occurs in the cause of ordinary stars
but this occurs on on the surface of the
white dwarf and the the hydrogen is
turned into helium which is more dense
and sinks down into the white dwarf. But
a burst of energy is released
and this burst makes the object very
bright and it's quite a violent event
but it is not powerful enough as the
hydrogen fusion ripples around the
surface of the white dwarf consuming all
the hydrogen turning it to helium. Um,
as the explosion runs around and uses up
all of that surface layer, it's not
enough power generated to unbind the
particles of the white dwarf. There's
not enough to disrupt it. The gravity of
the white dwarf still maintains the
upper hand. And so, the white dwarf
survives and carries on stealing matter
and the hydrogen builds up again. So,
the cycle repeats. Um, it's not
particularly regular. There's all sorts
of chaotic processes going on here, but
it can end up in a fairly semi-regular
pattern, which is what we're seeing at
the moment with eruptions about every 3
years.
Now, the Chandra satellite that detects
X-rays has studied GK Persi and detected
X-rays coming from the core. They're
actually from the region just outside
the core where the accretion disc is at
its hottest. And the superheated gas
that is spiraling inwards being heated
by friction and interactions with the
magnetic field of the white dwarf
is accelerating electrons to very very
high energies. Those are crashing into
nuclei and giving off X-rays. And the
temperature there, well, it's around
about 1 million Kelvin. Um, that's very
hot indeed. It needs to be a bit hotter
before you get fusion. You need usually
need 10 million to get nuclear fusion to
occur, which is why it has to build up
this layer of hydrogen that traps some
of the heat and eventually uh causes
these outbursts. But it's about a
million degrees with X-rays pouring in
every direction. And of course that too
is heating the surface of the white
dwarf as it's exposed to all this
radiation.
And so we've got a lovely picture here
of the fireworks nebula as it's called.
That's the nebula surrounding GK Persi.
This is one of those combined false
color pictures where they've taken
X-rays from the Chandra satellite,
visible light from the Hubble Space
Telescope, and radio waves from the VA
in the New Mexico desert, and combined
them with a pallet where X-rays are
blue, visible light is shown in yellow,
and the radio is shown in pink around
the edge there, revealing where there
are those high energy electrons that are
emitting all those radio waves as they
spiral and interact with the magnetic
field. So, a lovely picture and really
does look like fireworks.
So, that's the story of Nova 1901 GK
Perci and the Fireworks Nebula. Thanks
very much for listening and I'll leave
you with that um astronomical picture of
the day of the nebula. I think it's
absolutely fantastic. Thanks very much
again and uh if you get the chance,
remember to subscribe. It helps me to
carry on producing these videos. Bye for
now.